Node revamp: Controllers Lesson (#27695)
TheOdinProject/curriculum: nodeJS/express/controllers.md

### Introduction

> The controller’s job is really to act as the ultimate middleman. It knows which questions it wants to ask the model, but lets the model do all the heavy lifting for actually solving those questions. It knows which view it wants to render and send back to the browser, but lets the view itself take care of putting all that HTML together. That’s why it’s a “controller”… smart enough to know what to do and then delegate all the hard work. All it does is collect data for sending over to the view.

Author: Agree, copied the paragraph in the ruby lesson but it makes sense to remove it especially since I mostly covered it in the second

- [res.send](https://expressjs.com/en/api.html#res.send) - A general-purpose method for sending a response, it is flexible with what data you can send since it will automatically set the `Content-Type` header based on what data you pass, and yes including setting to an `application/json`.
- [res.json](https://expressjs.com/en/api.html#res.json) - If you want to send a JSON response, `res.json` is the way to go. It automatically sets the `Content-Type` header to `application/json` and sends the data as JSON. We will cover the use-case of this more later.
- [res.redirect](https://expressjs.com/en/api.html#res.redirect) - When you want to redirect the client to a different URL, this method allows for that capability.
- [res.render](https://expressjs.com/en/api.html#res.render) - If you're using a template engine that you will setup in a later lesson, `res.render` allows you to render a view template and send the rendered HTML as the response.

There is also a useful method that you can use to set the status code manually.

> - [res.status](https://expressjs.com/en/api.html#res.status) - You can also chain other methods through this (e.g. `res.status(200).send(...)` but note that you can't do `res.send(...).status(200)`). This method does not end the request-response cycle. And also `200` is already the default so you wouldn't necessarily need this for `200`, but for consistency, we'll keep using it.controller

Author: Ahh this reads so much better, thanks! And sure that's not a problem at all I can change the code examples

<div class="lesson-note" markdown="1">

#### res.send and res.json

> If `res.send` automatically sets the `Content-Type` based on the data passed. Why still use `res.json`? It's because `res.json` enforces JSON and will automatically convert non-object to JSON but `res.send` will not. But `res.json` is just a convenient method that also internally calls `res.send` but it handles anything JSON related. `res.send` also calls `res.json` internally but you will only see JSON type of `Content-Type` with booleans and objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `res.send` automatically sets the `Content-Type` based on the data passed, why would we still use `res.json`? `res.json` enforces JSON and will automatically convert non-object values to JSON, but `res.send` will not. `res.json` is just a convenient method that also internally calls `res.send`. `res.send` will only handle things as JSON when dealing with booleans and objects (which includes arrays).
```

> So for convenience it's more appropriate to use `res.json` instead of `res.send`, and if you are sending JSON then you might as well go for a method that is *named "json"*  :)

Reviewer: Are we fine on the smilies in lessons? Nothing inherently wrong with it of course, just wondering if it's better to stick with proper punctuating and using tone for lightheartedness/being casual.

Author: rephrased it to:

> So for convenience it's more appropriate to use `res.json` instead of `res.send`, and if you're sending JSON, you might as well use a method that's literally *named "json"*! It's like the perfect match!

let me know what you think

Reviewer: Perfecto 👌

</div>

> We also need to take note that these response methods only ends the request-response cycle, it does not end the function execution. So for example if you somehow do this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also need to take note that these response methods only end the request-response cycle. They do not end the function execution. For example if you somehow do this:
```

> ```javascript
> app.use((req, res) => {
>   res.send("Hello"); // This works and this ends the request-response cycle
> 
>   console.log('will still run!!'); // however it does not exit the function so this will still continue to run
>   res.send("Bye"); // This will not work but it will throw an error that you cannot send again after sending it to the client already
> })
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```javascript
app.use((req, res) => {
  // This works and this ends the request-response cycle
  res.send("Hello");

  // However, it does not exit the function so this will still run
  console.log('will still run!!');
  
  // This will then throw an error that you cannot send again after sending to the client already
  res.send("Bye"); 
});
```
````
Mainly formatting to keep comments above the respective lines (since we're not using a comment to show an output)

Author: Ahh yeah I forgot that comments next to code are usually outputs

### Middleware

Middleware functions are a core concept in Express and play a crucial role in handling requests and responses. They sit between the incoming request and the final intended route handler.

A middleware function typically takes three parameters (however, there is one that we will get into later that has four):

**NOTE**: Names are just convention, you can name them whatever you want `req -> request, res -> response, etc`

- `req` - The request object, which represents the incoming HTTP request.
- `res` - The response object, which represents the HTTP response that will be sent back to the client.

> - `next` - The function that pass the control to the *next* middleware (We'll get to this later). This is optional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `next` - The function that pass the control to the next middleware in the chain (we'll get to this later). This is optional.
```

A controller comes into play whenever a request hits the server and a route handler matches the requested route. The route handler determines which controller should handle the request based on the defined middleware chain. The appropriate controller then takes over and performs the necessary actions to fulfill the request. This could involve retrieving data from the model, processing the data, making decisions based on business logic, or updating the model with new data.

Once the controller has completed its tasks, it passes the processed data to the view, which renders the data into a format suitable for sending back to the client. Typically, this would be HTML. Later, when we cover building APIs, we can also send JSON responses like with the APIs that you've previously encountered e.g. Giphy API.

> Ultimately, controllers are pretty much just functions with well-defined responsibilities as part of the MVC pattern.

Author: What do you think if we move this bit to # Controllers instead of the introduction, since I now realize that we are just re-iterating the same stuff

New intro would look like:

> The controller's job is really to act as the ultimate middleman. It knows which questions it wants to ask the model, but lets the model do all the heavy lifting for actually solving those questions. It knows which view it wants to render and send back to the browser, but lets the view itself take care of putting all that HTML together. That's why it's a "controller" - it's smart enough to know what to do, then it delegates all the hard work. 
> 
> Ultimately, the controller is the brains of the operation ensuring that each component plays its part in delivering the final result and is really just a function with well-defined responsibilities as part of the MVC pattern.

And for the # Controllers section (removed the sentence that I think is the same):

> As said earlier, controllers are just functions, they also classify as a middleware (at least in the express world) that are used by route handlers.
> 
> A controller comes into play whenever a request hits the server and a route handler matches the requested route. The route handler determines which controller should handle the request based on the defined middleware chain. The appropriate controller then takes over and performs the necessary actions to fulfill the request. This could involve retrieving data from the model, processing the data, making decisions based on business logic, or updating the model with new data.
> 
> Once the controller has completed its tasks, it passes the processed data to the view, which renders the data into a format suitable for sending back to the client. Typically, this would be HTML. Later, when we cover building APIs, we can also send JSON responses like with the APIs that you've previously encountered e.g. Giphy API.

Reviewer: I like it!

A middleware can perform various tasks, such as:

- Modifying the request or response objects (some packages for example will do this, like adding a new property in the request object, or setting the `res.locals` that is used in templates rendered with `res.render`)
- Executing additional code (validation middlewares to validate the request before going to your main logic, authentication middlewares, and so on)
- Ending the request-response cycle (this also means that any other middlewares after the middleware that ended the cycle will not execute anymore)
- Calling the next middleware function in the stack (this is also important in validation middlewares, execute some validation code -> pass the control to the next middleware)

Express has a rich ecosystem and you will likely find a package that solves the problem you are encountering. For example, some packages provide middleware to handle authentication, cors, rate limiting, sessions, logging, validation, and more! But we should identify the basic and built-in ones first.

#### Application-level middleware

> Application-level middleware are bound to an *instance of Express* using the app.use or using app.METHOD (e.g. app.get, app.post) functions. These are middlewares that are executed in **every incoming requests** to the application with the specified path `/` being the default mount path (mount path can be changed by adding it as the first argument), but if the request-response cycle ends before even getting to the specific middleware then it will of course not run, but typically these middlewares are placed on top of your application code to ensure they always run first. Very common built-in middlewares that you will likely use are:

Reviewer: Makes sense I think

  // Call the next middleware/route handler
  next();
}

app.use(myMiddleware);
```

In this example, the middleware function logs a message, adds a custom property to the request object, and then calls the next() function to pass control to the next middleware or route handler. We also register the middleware through the usage of `app.use` which makes this an application-level middleware. Other middlewares below this one will now be able to see a property `customProperty` with the value `Hello from myMiddleware`.

One thing to note about is that middleware functions are executed in the order they are defined or registered in your application. This means that the sequence in which you define your middleware functions matters, as it determines the order in which they will be invoked during the request-response cycle. So you need to make sure and be aware that your middlewares are placed in the correct order. As an example, some packages have middlewares that changes the `Request` object, as a result these middlewares should be placed at the very top of your application in order for you to be able to see their changes in all of your middlewares below it.

> There is also a special type of middleware that handles errors which we will get to in a sec.

Author: Yeah for this one, in my mind "later" always means in a different lesson.

Would it be fine if we change it to:
> There is also a special type of middleware that handles errors, which we will discuss shortly.

> There is also a special type of middleware that handles errors which we will get to in a sec.

Reviewer: Works for me!

```

Here we have `middleware1`, `middleware2`, and `middleware3`. Where `middleware1` calls the `next` function, since we are not yet sending a response, we pass the control to the next middleware `middleware2` as indicated by the order of `app.use` calls where we send a response which ends the request-response cycle, since it has ended, the third middleware does not run. But if we somehow did not call the `next` function, do you know what would happen? Perhaps pop in the discord server and let us know what you think ;)

Also, as we've discussed earlier with regards to calling the `next` function. We have the following arguments that we can pass to it:

1. No argument `next()` - Will pass the control to the next middleware. Very simple and straightforward.
1. With an error argument `next(new Error(...))` - Will pass and move directly the control to the error middleware.
1. With the string `next('route')` - Will pass the control to the next route middleware. This only works for `app.METHOD` or `router.METHOD`. Potentially, it can also be the same as just calling `next` with no argument.

> 1. With the string `next('router')` - Will skip all middlewares attached to the specific router instance and pass the control back out of the router instance. Basically, we exit the router and go back to the parent router say `app` and yes the express `app` under the hood is also just a router.

Author: The captures it and reads better yes

Once the controller has completed its tasks, it passes the processed data to the view, which renders the data into a format suitable for sending back to the client. Typically, this would be HTML. Later, when we cover building APIs, we can also send JSON responses like with the APIs that you've previously encountered e.g. Giphy API.

The naming conventions for these controllers are usually based on the route they will be attached to e.g. GET route -> getSomething, POST route -> createSomething, DELETE route -> deleteSomething, etc. Nonetheless, there is no fixed rule since Express is not opinionated. It will always be based on you or someone else's conventions, and the requirements of the function.

```javascript
// user controller file - controllers/userController.js

const getUserById = async (req, res) => {
  const userId = req.params.id;

  const user = await someDBQueryToGetUser(userId);

  if (!user) {
    res.status(404).send("User not found");
    return;
  }

  res.send(`User found: ${user.name}`);
};
```

> In this example, the `getUserById` function is a controller that handles a specific action related to retrieving a user by their ID. Let's break down what's happening in this controller:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, the `getUserById` function is a controller that handles a specific action related to retrieving a user by their ID. You'll use this controller by importing it into file where routes are defined, and using it like so `router.get("/user/:id", getUserById)`. Let's break down what's happening in this controller:
```

    res.status(500).send("Internal Server Error");

    // or we can call next(error) instead of sending a response here
    // Using `next(error)` however will only render an error page in the express' default view and respond with the whole html to the client.
    // So we will need to create a special type of middleware function if we want a different response and we will get to that in a bit.
  }
};
```

However, this is not exactly a clean solution since eventually, we will have to add the same try/catch block to *all* controllers. There is a package called [express-async-handler](https://www.npmjs.com/package/express-async-handler) that you can install to hide this bit. It essentially just chains a `catch` to "catch" any errors in the function.

```javascript
const asyncHandler = require("express-async-handler");

// Any errors that is thrown in this function will automatically be caught and call the `next` function
const getUserById = asyncHandler(async (req, res) => {
  const userId = req.params.id;

  const user = await someDBQueryToGetUser(userId);

  if (!user) {
    res.status(404).send("User not found");
    return;
  }

  res.send(`User found: ${user.name}`);
});
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Can we add a lesson note of tip variant here? It should say something along the lines: 

> the asyncHandler function in the express-async-handler function is just 6 lines of code. try to take a guess on how it's implemented and then do [check out the source code](https://github.com/Abazhenov/express-async-handler/blob/master/index.js) for yourself.

Author: Should I remove `It essentially just chains a `catch` to "catch" any errors in the function` above and let them take a guess instead like described here?

Author: Removed it but let me know about your thoughts on that

```javascript
// Every thrown error in the application or the previous middleware function calling `next` with an error as an argument will eventually go to this middleware function
app.use((err, req, res, next) => {
  console.error(err);
  res.status(500).send(err);
});
```

However, take note that this is a middleware function that requires *four parameters* that you will need to provide even if they are not used. If you for example exclude one of the parameters, it will not be recognized as an error middleware function. You can try it out yourself ;)

It is the same as the previous middleware functions with three parameters but with one new parameter in a different order:

- `err` - The error object. This is an odd one but it *must* be the first parameter in the callback.
- `req` - The request object, which represents the incoming HTTP request.
- `res` - The response object, which represents the HTTP response that will be sent back to the client.

> - `next` - The function that pass the control to the *next* middleware function (We'll get to this later). This is optional.

Reviewer 2: we don't need to explain these params again

Author: Condensed it to

> It is the same as the previous middleware functions with three parameters but with one new parameter in a different order which is the error object. This is an odd one but the error object *must* be the first parameter in the callback.

Also, as we've discussed earlier with regards to calling the `next` function. We have the following arguments that we can pass to it:

1. No argument `next()` - Will pass control to the next middleware function. Very simple and straightforward.
1. With an error argument `next(new Error(...))` - Will pass control directly to the error middleware function.
1. With the string `next('route')` - Will pass control to the next route handler with the same matching path (if there is one). This only works for `app.METHOD` or `router.METHOD`. Potentially, it can also be the same as just calling `next` with no argument.
1. With the string `next('router')` - Will skip all middleware functions attached to the specific router instance and pass control back out of the router instance. Basically, we exit the router and go back to the parent router, e.g. `app` (yes, the Express app is also just a router under the hood).

Out of the four, you will likely only use the first two, unless you have a very specific need that requires the other two.

### Consolidating what we've learned

> A basic example of the file structure would be:

Reviewer 2: Wording suggestion:

```suggestion
Following is the folder structure you'd end up with if you have been coding along:
```

Author: Made it `The following ...`

```

Route file for the "User"

```javascript
// route file - routes/userRoutes.js

const express = require('express');
const userController = require('<path-to-user-controller>');

const router = express.Router();

// You can for example add a top level middleware function that handles say authentication and only let the request come in if they're authenticated
// This prevents from executing the middleware functions below if the request is not authenticated
// We will learn more about authentication in later lessons
// usually calls either next() or next(error)

// router.use(authMiddleware);

// router-level midlewares

// router.route allows you to chain route handlers on a specified path
// will only execute on `/users/` not `/users/a/b/c` for example unless `router.use` is used
// connect your controllers with the route handlers
router.route('/')
  .get(userController.getUsers)
  .post(userController.createUser);
  // You will likely place your validation/authentication middleware functions here or perhaps in the controller file, e.g.
  // .post(validationMiddleware, userController.createUser)

router.route('/:id')
  .get(userController.getUserById);

> module.exports = router;

Reviewer 2: can we follow the `router.get("route")` and `router.post("route")` syntax, since that's what we use in other lessons.

### Introduction

The controller's job is really to act as the ultimate middleman. It knows which questions it wants to ask the model, but lets the model do all the heavy lifting for actually solving those questions. It knows which view it wants to render and send back to the browser, but lets the view itself take care of putting all that HTML together. That's why it's a "controller" - it's smart enough to know what to do, then it delegates all the hard work.

Ultimately, the controller is the brains of the operation ensuring that each component plays its part in delivering the final result and is really just a function with well-defined responsibilities as part of the MVC pattern.

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this lesson.

- Explore various response methods.
- Implement error handling middleware to catch and process errors gracefully.
- Describe common use cases for middleware, such as validation and authentication.

> - Know basic file structure.

Reviewer 2: Not sure if we need this lesson overview
```suggestion
```

So for convenience it's more appropriate to use `res.json` instead of `res.send`, and if you're sending JSON, you might as well use a method that's literally named "json". It's like the perfect match!

</div>

We also need to take note that these response methods only end the request-response cycle. They do not end the function execution. For example if you somehow do this:

```javascript
app.use((req, res) => {
  // This works and this ends the request-response cycle
  res.send("Hello");

  // However, it does not exit the function so this will still run
  console.log('will still run!!');

  // This will then throw an error that you cannot send again after sending to the client already
  res.send("Bye");
});
```

### Middleware

Middleware functions are a core concept in Express and play a crucial role in handling requests and responses. They sit between the incoming request and the final intended route handler.

> A middleware function typically takes three parameters (however, there is one that we will get into later that has four):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A middleware function typically takes three arguments (however, there is one that we will get into later that has four):
```

> **NOTE**: Names are just convention, you can name them whatever you want `req -> request, res -> response, etc`

Reviewer 2: I think this note should be after the list that explains the parameters

- Body parsers (e.g. `express.json`, `express.urlencoded`) - These allows to correctly parse the incoming request's body, so that you can use it through `req.body`.
- Serving static files (e.g. `app.use(express.static('public'))`) -  It is a middleware function for serving static files, such as HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and images. You can pass an argument to specify which directory to serve the static files.
- Setting up views (you will learn how in the Views lesson).

#### Router-level middleware

Router-level middleware works similarly to application-level middlewares but is bound to an *instance of Express router* using router.use or router.METHOD (e.g. router.get) functions. This however is only executed when the request matches the specific route as you've probably already learned in the Routes lesson.

Here is an example of a basic middleware function:

```javascript
function myMiddleware(req, res, next) {
  // Perform some operations
  console.log("Middleware function called");

  // Modify the request object
  req.customProperty = "Hello from myMiddleware";

  // Call the next middleware/route handler
  next();
}

app.use(myMiddleware);
```

> In this example, the middleware function logs a message, adds a custom property to the request object, and then calls the next() function to pass control to the next middleware fucntion or route handler. We also register the middleware function through the usage of `app.use` which makes this an application-level middleware. Other middleware functions below this one will now be able to see a property `customProperty` with the value `Hello from myMiddleware`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the middleware function logs a message, adds a custom property to the request object, and then calls the next() function to pass control to the next middleware function or route handler. We also register the middleware function through the usage of `app.use` which makes this an application-level middleware. Other middleware functions below this one will now be able to see a property `customProperty` with the value `"Hello from myMiddleware"`.
```
Typo and explicitly making the referenced string value a string.

One thing to note about is that middleware functions are executed in the order they are defined or registered in your application. This means that the sequence in which you define your middleware functions matters, as it determines the order in which they will be invoked during the request-response cycle. So you need to make sure and be aware that your middleware fnuctions are placed in the correct order. As an example, some packages have middleware functions that changes the `Request` object, and as a result, these middleware functions should be placed at the very top of your application in order for you to be able to see their changes in all of your middleware functions below it.

There is also a special type of middleware function that handles errors, which we will discuss shortly.

### Controllers

As said earlier, controllers are just functions. They also classify as a middleware (at least in the Express world) that are used by route handlers.

> A controller comes into play whenever a request hits the server and a route handler matches the requested route. The route handler determines which controller should handle the request based on the defined middleware chain. The appropriate controller then takes over and performs the necessary actions to fulfill the request. This could involve retrieving data from the model, processing the data, making decisions based on business logic, or updating the model with new data.
> 
> Once the controller has completed its tasks, it passes the processed data to the view, which renders the data into a format suitable for sending back to the client. Typically, this would be HTML. Later, when we cover building APIs, we can also send JSON responses like with the APIs that you've previously encountered e.g. Giphy API.
> 
> The naming conventions for these controllers are usually based on the route handler they will be attached to e.g. get route -> getSomething, post route -> createSomething, delete route -> deleteSomething, etc. Nonetheless, there is no fixed rule since Express is not opinionated. It will always be based on you or someone else's conventions, and the requirements of the function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A controller comes into play whenever a request hits the server and a route matches the requested HTTP verb and path. The route determines which controller should handle the request based on the defined middleware chain. The appropriate controller then takes over and performs the necessary actions to fulfill the request. This could involve retrieving data from the model, processing the data, making decisions based on business logic, or updating the model with new data.

Once the controller has completed its tasks, it passes the processed data to the view, which renders the data into a format suitable for sending back to the client. Typically, this would be HTML. Later, when we cover building APIs, we can also send JSON responses like with the APIs that you've previously encountered e.g. Giphy API.

The naming conventions for these controllers are usually based on the route they will be attached to e.g. GET route -> getSomething, POST route -> createSomething, DELETE route -> deleteSomething, etc. Nonetheless, there is no fixed rule since Express is not opinionated. It will always be based on you or someone else's conventions, and the requirements of the function.
```
I think I may have mistakenly asked these to be worded as "route handlers", whereas technically they should be "routes" (which refers to the entire `app.get('/'. () => {});` thing). The rest of the lesson uses "route handler" correctly (which is technically another term Express uses for the controllers). I'll be amending the intro lesson to use "routes" as well.

Author: Sounds good!

A controller comes into play whenever a request hits the server and a route matches the requested HTTP verb and path. The route determines which controller should handle the request based on the defined middleware chain. The appropriate controller then takes over and performs the necessary actions to fulfill the request. This could involve retrieving data from the model, processing the data, making decisions based on business logic, or updating the model with new data.

Once the controller has completed its tasks, it passes the processed data to the view, which renders the data into a format suitable for sending back to the client. Typically, this would be HTML. Later, when we cover building APIs, we can also send JSON responses like with the APIs that you've previously encountered e.g. Giphy API.

The naming conventions for these controllers are usually based on the route they will be attached to e.g. `GET` route -> `getSomething`, `POST` route -> `createSomething`, `DELETE` route -> `deleteSomething`, etc. Nonetheless, there is no fixed rule since Express is not opinionated. It will always be based on you or someone else's conventions, and the requirements of the function.

> 

Reviewer 2: To be more explicit:

```suggestion

Let's define our first controller! Create a folder called `controllers` at the root of your Express project. Then create a `userController.js` file within it:

```

// This prevents from executing the middleware functions below if the request is not authenticated
// We will learn more about authentication in later lessons
// usually calls either next() or next(error)

// router.use(authMiddleware);

// router-level midlewares

// GET request for getting all the users
router.get('/', userController.getUsers);

// You will likely place your validation/authentication middleware functions here or perhaps in the controller file, e.g.
// router.post(validationMiddleware, userController.createUser)

// POST request for creating a user
router.post('/', userController.createUser);

// GET request for getting the user by id
router.get('/:id', userControoler.getUserById);

module.exports = router;
```

The main application file, our entry point.

```javascript
// app file

const express = require('express');
const morgan = require('morgan');
const userRouter = require('<path-to-user-routes>');

const app = express();

// application-level middlewares, will always execute on every incoming requests, base mount path is `/`

// a nice to have logger, will automatically show logs for every http request

> app.use(morgan('dev'));

Reviewer 2: Can we remove logger from this code example? This lesson is already super long. I'll add a logger recommendation in one of the project lessons (either mini message board or inventory app)

Author: done

// parses incoming request's body with JSON payloads(e.g. payloads sent through the network with a JSON.stringify'd body in a fetch call as one example)
// to make it available for use in `req.body`.
app.use(express.json());

// same as above but parses incoming requests with URL-encoded payloads (e.g name=Damon&role=Professional)
// more information on extended in the express documentation

> app.use(express.urlencoded({ extended: false }));

Reviewer 2: Same here, can we remove `express.json` middleware. I'd rather give it a proper introduction when they encounter it later in the API lessons. Plus, can we have simple comment explanation of `express.urlencoded` i.e. "parses form payloads  and sets it to `req.body`

Author: done

app.use((req, res, next) => {
  // You can of course also create your own for your own use-case!
  // Just make sure to call `next`
  next();
})

// base mount path is `/users` and will always execute on that specific mount path, and yes including `/users/a/b/c`
app.use('/users', userRouter);

> ```

Reviewer 2: to "conplete" the code example, can we add an `app.listen` function

Author: done
